For code navigation the [Microsoft C/C++ Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools) or [Clangd extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=llvm-vs-code-extensions.vscode-clangd) can be used for C/C++ language support. By default, projects created with **ESP-IDF: Create Project from Extension Template** or **ESP-IDF: Show Examples Projects** include a template for Microsoft C/C++ extension `c_cpp_properties.json` configuration file and doesn't need to be configured.

Run **ESP-IDF: Run idf.py reconfigure task** to generate the **compile_commands.json** file so language support works.

# Configuration of c_cpp_properties.json File

The [C/C++ Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools) can be used to provide C and C++ syntax highlight, code navigation and Go to declaration/definition within C and C++ files.
The default configuration file is located in `{PROJECT_DIR}/.vscode/c_cpp_properties.json` and can be generated by using **ESP-IDF: Create Project from Extension Template** command or using the **ESP-IDF: Add .vscode Configuration Folder** command.

## Why configure this file?

To enable Code Navigation, auto-complete and other language support features on ESP-IDF source files on Visual Studio Code. Please take a look at [C/C++ Configurations](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/cpp/config-linux#_cc-configurations) for more detail about c_cpp_properties.json configuration fields.

## Default Configuration with compile_commands.json

For the default configuration, you must build your project beforehand in order to generate `${workspaceFolder}/build/compile_commands.json` (where \${workspaceFolder} is your project directory). This file will then be used to resolve your C/C++ headers.

```json
{
  "configurations": [
    {
      "name": "ESP-IDF",
      "compilerPath": "/path/to/toolchain-gcc",
      "compileCommands": "${workspaceFolder}/build/compile_commands.json",
      "includePath": [
        "${config:idf.espIdfPath}/components/**",
        "${config:idf.espIdfPathWin}/components/**",
        "${workspaceFolder}/**"
      ],
      "browse": {
        "path": [
          "${config:idf.espIdfPath}/components",
          "${config:idf.espIdfPathWin}/components",
          "${workspaceFolder}"
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "version": 4
}
```

> **NOTE:** When you create a project using the extension commands such as `Show Examples Projects`, `New Project`, `Create Project from Extension Template` or you add the configuration files to an existing project using the `Add .vscode Configuration Folder`, this file is created with the compilerPath of the configured toolchain for your current `idf.adapterTargetName`.

## Recursive search configuration

With this configuration, the IntelliSense engine of the C/C++ extension will include all header files found by performing a recursive search of the `${config:idf.espIdfPath}/components` folder.
For this configuration to work, you need to set you C/C++ Extension IntelliSense engine to **Tag Parser** by using `C_Cpp.intelliSenseEngine": "Tag Parser"` in your settings.json and remove the `"compileCommands": "${workspaceFolder}/build/compile_commands.json"` property from the `c_cpp_properties.json`. Example:

```json
{
  "configurations": [
    {
      "name": "ESP-IDF",
      "compilerPath": "/path/to/toolchain-gcc",
      "includePath": [
        "${config:idf.espIdfPath}/components/**",
        "${config:idf.espIdfPathWin}/components/**",
        "${workspaceFolder}/**"
      ],
      "browse": {
        "path": [
          "${config:idf.espIdfPath}/components",
          "${config:idf.espIdfPathWin}/components",
          "${workspaceFolder}"
        ]
      }
    }
  ],
  "version": 4
}
```
