# Using **gcov** and **gcovr** to provide code coverage

Source code coverage is data indicating the count and frequency of every program execution path that has been taken within a program’s runtime. [Gcov](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gcov) is a GCC tool that, when used in concert with the compiler, can generate log files indicating the execution count of each line of a source file. The [Gcovr](https://gcovr.com/) tool is utility for managing Gcov and generating summarized code coverage results.

Please read [GCOV Code coverage](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-guides/app_trace.html#gcov-source-code-coverage) to learn more about code coverage with gcov in ESP-IDf projects.

## Requirements

Your ESP-IDF project should be configured to generate gcda/gcno coverage files using gcov as shown in [GCOV Code coverage](https://docs.espressif.com/projects/esp-idf/en/latest/esp32/api-guides/app_trace.html#gcov-source-code-coverage). Please take a look at the [ESP-IDF gcov example](https://github.com/espressif/esp-idf/tree/master/examples/system/gcov) as example project.

This extension requires `gcovr` to generate JSON and HTML reports from generated files. This is installed as part of this extension ESP-IDF Debug Adapter Python requirements when following the **ESP-IDF: Configure ESP-IDF extension** command.
Please take a look at [SETUP](./SETUP.md) for more information.

Make sure you had properly configure xtensa toolchain in `idf.customExtraPaths` or in your environment variable PATH since the gcov executable used is `xtensa-esp32-elf-gcov` (or the corresponding gcov for your IDF_TARGET) and `gcovr` exists in the same directory as your `${idf.pythonBinPath}` path.

## Editor Coverage

For the text editor highlighting, the **ESP-IDF: Add Editor coverage** command execute a child process with `gcovr -r . --gcov-executable {TOOLCHAIN_PREFIX}-gcov --json`. You can remove the coverage highlight with **ESP-IDF; Remove Editor coverage**.

> **NOTE:** This assumes you had configure your extension with Xtensa toolchain in `idf.customExtraPaths` and installed the `gcovr` from Debug adapter's python requirements.

For the text editor, we use the json object generated by the previous command to highlight each line if it is covered or if it is not. We don't highlight noncode lines.

You can customize highlight color using the extension settings. Visual Studio code support `"red"`, `rgb(255,0,120)` or `rgba(120,0,0,0.1)` values.

- Covered lines use `idf.coveredLightTheme` for light themes and `idf.coveredDarkTheme` for dark themes.
- Partially covered lines use `idf.partialLightTheme` for light themes and `idf.partialDarkTheme` for dark themes.
- Non-covered lines use `idf.uncoveredLightTheme` for light themes and `idf.uncoveredDarkTheme` for dark themes.

## HTML report

The **ESP-IDF: Get HTML Coverage Report for project** execute a child process with command `gcovr -r . --gcov-executable {TOOLCHAIN_PREFIX}-gcov --html` for the HTML report.

> **NOTE:** This assumes you had configure your extension with Xtensa toolchain in `idf.customExtraPaths` and installed the `gcovr` from Debug adapter's python requirements.

With the generated HTML from `gcovr`, a Webview Panel is launched to show the gcov html report.
